Code Complete
=============

Code Complete is a book written by Steve McConnell which explains why planning 
in software construction is important, describes how to build large maintainable
programs and how excellent systems looks like. Code Complete argues that
software construction is an important subject because it is the only activity
that is guaranteed to happen.

Chapter 3: Measure twice, cut once
----------------------------------
Chapter 3 describes how writing prerequisites and careful preparation reduce
risk of failure and allow construction to happen smoothly from beginning until
the end. There are two ways in which prerequisites can be written: sequentially
or iteratively. Sequential approach is appropriate if the application area is
familiar, the system design is understood well and if there is little risk that
the project will fail. Iterative approach is appropriate if the opposite is true
and when making changes is cheap and predictability is not important.

Prerequisites
-------------
Prerequisites are an important part of preparing for a project as they are the
foundation upon which the software is going to be built.

Problem definition prerequisites should define the problem without referencing
a solution.

Requirements describe what the software will do and are specified as
functionalities that the user wants. Requirements often change and those changes
should be managed. Requirement changes are managed by assessing the quality of
existing requirements and then altering them if they are not good enough,
setting up a change control procedure if they come from clients, by making the
system flexible enough to easily accommodate changes and keeping an eye on the
business case for the project. Requirements are also important because they
allows users to agree to them and they avoid arguments about what functionality
should be implemented.

Architecture determines the integrity of the system and if the correct solution
has been found. Architecture is made up of the following components:
- Program organisation - present evidence of considering alternative program
organisation, describe the role of each program, describe major building blocks
and make sure each requirement is covered by at least one building block,
specify how building blocks interact with each other. Each building block
should have only one area of responsibility and should know as little as
possible about other building blocks.

- Major classes - specify how the classes should be used, describe the
responsibility of each class, specify how classes interact with each other,
describe alternative class designs.

- Data design - describe major files and structures to se used, describe
alternatives to the chosen data structures, specify contents of databases, why
is a database used (instead of a flat file), what views were created and so on.
Data should be accessed only by one class.

- Business rules - identify them, describe their impact upon the system.

- User interface - specify major elements, modularise the architecture, make it
flexible so UI element can be swapped, discarded and added without a lot of
code changes.

- Resource management - describe how database connections, threads and handles
are used, estimated memory requirements for extreme and nominal cases.

- Security - how are handle buffers, untrusted inputs, encryption and error
messages handled.

- Performance - speed vs memory vs cost analysis.

- Scalability - describe how the system grow.

- Internationalisation and localisation - describe which character set is being
used, how would translations impact the system, how are strings stored (in a
resource file or class and why). Important in interactive systems.

- Input and output - where are input and output errors detected.

- Error processing - is error detection corrective or detective, passive or
active, how are error messages handled, what about exceptions, at what level
are errors handled, who has the responsibility to validate inputs. Very
important subject!

- Fault tolerance - how error resistant is the system, describe the collection
of techniques that increase system scalability by detecting errors. 

- Architectural feasibility - demonstrate that it is possible to complete the
project.

- Overengineering and robustness - will the system continue if it detects an
error, how overengineered should the system be to ensure robustness.

- Buy vs build decision - what components should be programmed and which should
be downloaded and used.

- Reuse decision - what programs are going to be reused.

- Change strategy - describe how changes will be handled, what are possible
enhancements, how are new data or changes to existing data be anticipated, how
changes impact the need to change the code.

- General architectural quality - characterised by discussions of classes,
information that is hidden in them and reasons why classes are designed in a
particular way, architecture’s objectives should be clearly stated, architecture
should describe the motivations for all major decisions, architecture should be
machine and language independent, architecture should explicitly identify risky
areas and should contain multiple views.

Chapter 4: Key Construction Decisions
-------------------------------------
Working in a familiar programming language increases productivity and so does
working in a highly expressive language.

Programming conventions
-----------------------
Specify all programming conventions before a project, so that programs can have
excellent integrity and cohesion at code level. Specify how variables will be
named, classes, routines and comments.

Programming into a language
---------------------------
Most of the important programming principles depend not on specific languages
but on the way you use them. If your language lacks constructs that you want to
use or is prone to other kinds of problems, try to compensate for them. Invent
your own coding conventions, standards, class libraries, and other augmentations.

Chapter 5: Design in Construction
---------------------------------
Design is a scheme for turning specifications into a working program. Mistakes
in design are to be expected and it is much better to make them in design then
in construction because it is cheaper to correct them.

There are two types of difficulty in design: accidental and essential. Essential
referes to essential property, a property an object must have to be that object.
Accidental or optional refers to accidental property, a property that an object
just happens to have. Fred Brooks argues in his "No Silver Bullet" paper that
accidental problems in software construction have been solved and that all that
remains is to solve essential problems. Solving essential programs is difficult
because software development consists of working out all the details of a highly
intricate, interlocking set of concepts. In one word, the problem is complexity
and solving it would be to manage complexity.

Ineffective designs arise from three sources: a complex solution to a simple
problem, an incorrect simple solution to a complex problem and an inappropriate
complex solution to a complex solution. Complexity can therefor be managed by
minimizing the amount of essential complexity you have to deal with at any one
time and keeping accidental complexity from proliferating.

Desirable Characteristics of a Design
-------------------------------------
- Minimal complexity - don't make a clever design, make it simple and easy to
understand. You know your design is good if you can ignore most other parts of
the program when you focus on one specific part.

- Ease of maintenance - design a self explanatory system that can be easily
maintained.

- Loose coupling - design so that you hold connections among different parts of
the program to a minimum.

- Extensibility - make it so that the most likely changes or enhancements cause
the system the least trauma.

- Reusability - design the system so pieces of the program can be used again.

- High fan-in - fan in refers to a utility program or a class being used by many
other classes or programs.

- Low-to-medium fan-out - refers to a program of a class using many other
programs or classes. This should be avoided.

- Portability - design a system so it can be easily moved to another environment.

- Leanness - make sure nothing can be taken away or deleted from the system and
everything that can be, should be removed to reduce complexity and the need for
testing.

- Stratification - the level of abstraction should be consistent throughout the
program layer.

- Standard techniques - using a standardized, familiar approach will make the
system easier to understand.

Levels of Design
----------------
1) Software system - the whole system

2) Division into Subsystems/Packages  - identify major subsystems, how they are
going to interact and communicate, make sure their communication is restricted
as much as possible. Think about it in terms of pulling out a subsystem... how
much work is it going to be to get the rest of the system working again?

3) Division into Classes - identify all classes in the system and define their
interfaces. Partition the subsystem into smaller parts you can go ahead and
implement.

4) Division into Routines - each class is divided into routines (methods,
functions). A class interface defined in 3) will define some routines.

5) Internal Routine Design - design the detailed functionality of an individual
routine.

Design Building Blocks
----------------------
Design is not a deterministic and should be done through the application of
heuristics. Here are some of them:
- Find Real World Objects - a by the book approach of finding objects in the
real world that can be mapped through methods and attributes to synthetic
software object and classes. The mapping activities are: identify the objects
and their attributes, determine what can be done to each object and what each
object is allowed to do to other objects, determined which parts of the object
will be visible to other objects, define each object's interface.

- Form Consistent Abstractions - abstractions allows you to ignore irrelevant
details.

- Encapsulate Implementation Details - encapsulation forbids you to look at the
complexity.

- Inheritance Simplifies the Design - polymorphism. Inheritance allows you to
write a general routine to handle general properties of many classes.

- Hide Secrets - information hiding. Each class should hide design decisions
from all other classes. Decide which methods can be seen from the outside. Don't
let other programs know what they don't have to know because then if you make a
change the effects of it would be localised. For example, instead of declaring
an attribute int you could declare it as AttType.

Barriers to information hiding are excessive distribution of information such as
exposing details about implementation and  having literals instead of constants.
Circular dependencies, using class data as global data and prematurely worrying
about performance penalties. Ask "What should I hide?" to dissolve many
difficult design issues.

- Identify Areas Likely to Change - identify, separate and isolate items that
are likely to change. To more easily identify changes, imagine making a small
change and then think about what you will have to change to accommodate the
improvement.

- Keep Coupling Loose - classes should be loosely related to other classes. The
same applies to methods. Minimize the number of connections to other modules,
make connections visible and obvious, make sure many other modules can call the
 module as easily as possible. Semantic coupling should be avoided because it
makes a module know something about the inner workings of another module.

- Look for Common Design Patterns - design pattern an solve many existing
problems. Patterns reduce complexity because they are well known abstractions,
they reduce errors, they will suggests design alternatives.

Other Heuristics:
- Aim for Strong Cohesion - methods should support a central purpose
- Build Hierarchies - make a method hierarchy based on which methods calls
which, keep the most abstract program, class and method on top.  
- Formalize Class Contracts - through interfaces
- Assign Responsibilities - ask what are the classes' responsibilities.
- Design for Test - think about how you are going to test a class and methods.
- Avoid Failure - consider how software might fail, don't just copy what is
successful.
- Choose Binding Time Consciously - think about when should a value be bounded
to a variable.
- Make Central Points of Control - make it so that when you have to make a
change, you can make it in a single place.
- Consider Using Brute Force - do it. A simple solution that works is better
then an elegant solution that doesn't.
- Draw a Diagram - pictures are easier to understand then long sentences.
- Keep Your Design Modular - make a system out of black boxes. You know what
goes in and comes out but not what goes on in there... until you open up the
black box.

At the end of the day, don't get stuck by using a single approach. Try different
ones if the first one doesn't work.

Design Practices
----------------
Iterating a design will yield better result every time. If you equipped yourself
with additional knowledge after designing the system once, go improve it.

Divide and conquer the program. Divide it into smaller programs and then solve
each one separately, then look at the bigger picture and solve the more abstract
puzzle.

Top down approach decomposes the problem into smaller parts until the design
seems far too simple and easy. The problem should be decomposed into many levels
of decreasing complexity. It is easy to do because details are left for a later
stage. 

Buttom up approach starts at the level of responsibilities which are assigned to
concrete classes. Ask yourself what functionality should the system implement,
identify objects, group up common objects and continue to do so until you
packaged a large part of the system. It identifies utility functionalities early
which results in a well designed high level classes.  However, its weakness is
its overwhelming complexity.

Bottom up and top down approaches complement each other. Use both of them. Do
bottom up until the system becomes to complex, then switch to top down, until
it is too easy, so you switch back to bottom up.

Experimental prototyping is used to partially solve a problem so that you know
if your design will work. Prototyping is writing the least amount of throwaway
code that is needed to answer a specific design question. Design questions must
be specific, the code should be thrown away and you should write the absolute
minimum amount of code.

Collaborative design can greatly improve the design. For quality assurance use
formal inspections, but if you want to generate design alternatives, you can use
a less formal approach.

Capturing your design work can consist of inserting design decisions into the
program itself in a form of a comment, you could have a Wiki or a collection of
web pages, use a camera to photo drawings or some other method such as using
cards or UML.
